The places that I've been,
like I said, to get to this place...
The real estate is really not
what you would call,
you know, they probably
have an ocean view,
but to get there it takes 1001 steps.
Immediately after the earthquake
MCC sent a lot
of structural engineers here
to inspect buildings for our partners.
You know, schools, hospitals,
churches, orphanages,
and I was lucky to be part of
that team that came in March.
MCC is reaching out to Haitian builders
by teaching more earthquake-resistant
construction techniques
through workshops and rebuilding projects.
James Mwangi,
of Paso Robles, California,
decided to return to Haiti for a year
after his short-term stay
inspecting buildings
in the wake of the earthquake.
He is using his experience and
knowledge as a structural engineer
and professor at
California Polytechnic University
to lead building-workshops
and advise and coordinate with masons
as they repair and rebuild Haitian homes.
Look at how dangerous this thing is!
This thing can come down at anytime.
Even any day, evan a strong wind
could bring this building down now.
Even not an earthquake.
So this is normal here for these homes
we are going to look at
because these are the disabled people.
In the beginning they were already
marginalized economically,
so they built in
the cheapest places, you know,
which are very hard to get to.
He needs to come in a cut this
when he removes the wall.
Because that footing, he needs to put
a beam all the way at the bottom.
Tell him that...
If you drive around this country
or even if you Google a satellite map,
what you're not going to see
is a lot of trees here.
In North America we are used to -
I'm from California -
so a lot of our homes in California,
because of high seismicity,
we build them very light.
So we use wood construction
because that way
they are very light in earthquakes.
We are able to detail them,
anchor them down and...
they are structurally safe.
Here this would be great
if they had timber.
Unfortunately, they don't have lumber here,
they don't have trees here.
What we are trying to encourage
is to use the same materials
that they have here,
but make it better,
make it better quality.
In North America we have about
eight different types of cement
that we use for different construction.
There's type one,
type two, type three,
and every one of these is basically blended,
so that it is for a particular purpose.
In Haiti you get one type -
one type of cement for everything.
We are trying not to import any material,
but we are trying to use
everything that is available here
and see if we can get a better product.
James has trained over 150
engineers and masons
in hazard-resistant construction
and building practices
during week-long workshops,
as well as participated
in a planning project
for a new Haitian school of engineering.
So when we talk in our workshop
and we say, look at this -
how can you build it better
so that you save lives,
it hits home.
These people know exactly
what you are talking about.
What I heard them talking about
were the cracks in the walls of the house.
Then they talked about the columns,
all of that.
They talked about the amount to use,
then about the cement
to lay down the bricks.
Then they talked about the water
to mix the cement.
Engineer James talked about
all that as well.
And he gave us...
Well, everything that was
said in the training
we'll put into practice.
They don't need a manual;
they can see it through their eyes.
And that, I think,
is where MCC comes in.
Because right now, you know,
sometimes, like they say,
you can solve a problem during crisis.
And if you can do that--
there's a big problem here.
Building codes, building standards,
building materials.
If you can solve that now
when everybody is aware of it
and set a goal that, OK,
we can start a training program here
that is sustainable.
I think that will go a long, long way
and I think MCC stand
a very good chance of doing that
with what we are trying to do here.
Ismael Printemps and his family
were forced to move to a tent camp
after their home was
badly damaged in the earthquake.
MCC worked with
three partner organizations
to help restore the homes
of families like the Printemps.
I was in the house
during the earthquake.
The walls trembled
and one fell down.
We didn't have support for 30 hours,
and that's why
we had to go to the camp.
Through James' workshops,
masons were offered jobs
to rebuild or repair these homes.
This was a test project
to repair 30 homes in 30 days.
In some of these homes
you have nine people
living in two or three bedrooms.
Or not just bedrooms
but a two-room house
you have six to eight, nine people.
And in Haiti the way it works is such
that even if this house is repaired,
it's not just that family
that's going to come from the camp.
There is this extended family that,
if you have some shelter,
all your relatives are going to come
and occupy that shelter.
So by us repairing
even two rooms for one family,
we might bring three
or four families out of the camps.
So it's going to go a long, long way.
Before the earthquake
we had jobs and were working.
Now, after the earthquake,
we don't have jobs,
but we're still alive
and living together as a family.
The best thing
MCC has done for us
is to repair the house
so we can come back here.
Earthquakes are going
to be here to stay.
Cyclones are going to be here to stay.
We have seen,
by neglecting all this education,
having these contractors
do whatever they need to do,
having the government not have
any control of building codes,
we have seen what will happen.
It happened here.
I mean, it's been
incredibly challenging for everyone.
We're always conscious of that,
that we can only do what we can do,
but we're trying to do that well.
And we're trying to do that
in a way that respects our principles
and the wishes and principles
of our Haitian partners,
who I'd like to think that it's
their voices and their vision
that guide what we're doing here.
Thank you for your generosity
in this difficult situation.
Ongoing work that will continue
into next year includes building of homes,
support of small businesses,
short-term job creation,
community development,
and advocating for responsible
national and international intervention.
We encourage all who have given
to MCC's earthquake response
to stay engaged in our efforts by checking
the MCC website or Facebook page.